# Tutorial: Build a simple package - Part 2: Unity
In this tutorial, you will build a simple package using this Unity UPM Package Template. This second part cover the Unity development.

You will build a custom package for a randomization library. The package MyRandom will provide a class Sampler that contains a Sample method to manage the sampling of items from a list.

This tutorial assumes:
- A package is developed locally (see [part 1](./build-simple-package-1-local.md))
- VSCode is installed
- Git is installed
- Dotnet is installed
- Unity is installed
- A Unity project exists

## 1. Create a upm branch
Create a new branch to keep the clean version of the package, without useless files. To do so, open the console (ctrl+J, go to Terminal) and run the following commands (if main is not the main branch replace it):

```
git checkout -b upm
git push -u origin upm
git checkout main
```

## 2. Check the GitHub Workflow
Check that the branch in the workflow (.github/workflows/sync-upm.yml) referred at on.push.branches corresponds to the main branch in the repository. If not, rename the branch in the workflow definition.

Then, go to your repository settings and grant the permissions to read and write to the user authenticated with the GITHUB_TOKEN. You can follow this link (replace the user):

```
https://github.com/<user>/my-random/settings/actions
```

You can check the GitHub docs: [repository settings and permissions][github-token-permission].

## 3. Compute meta files
Open a Unity project in the Unity Editor, then open the Package Manager and import the "my-random" package as a local folder.
Meta files are generated automatically by Unity in the folder.

Note 1. The obj and bin folders generated by dotnet may cause the import to fail, nevertheless as long as the meta files are created that is not an issue. Those folders may also be deleted beforehand to avoid errors.

Note 2. If you followed the part 1 of this tutorial, you won't see them in VSCode (due to .vscode/settings.json) but you can see them if you explore the directory.

You can check the Unity docs: [import the package from local folder][unity-upm-local].

## 4. Push changes
Commit the changes (all the meta files) and push them to the origin. You can use the following commands from terminal.

```
git add --all
git commit -m "Add Unity meta files"
git push
```

## 5. Verify the workflow worked
Verify that the GitHub Action successfully updated the "upm" branch.

You can check it at this link (replace the user):

```
https://github.com/<user>/my-random/actions/workflows/sync-upm.yml
```

## 6. Reload package in Unity
Open a Unity project in the Unity Editor, then open the Package Manager and remove the "my-random" package previously imported.

Import "my-random" package as a git repository targetting the upm branch. The repository reference is the following (replace the user):

```
https://github.com/<user>/my-random.git#upm
```

You can check the Unity docs:
- [import the package from git][unity-upm-git]
- [specify git revision][unity-upm-git-revision]

## 7. Register package as testable
Register the package as a "testable" package in the manifest of the unity project.

To do so, open the "MyUnityProject/Packages/manifest.json" files of the Unity project, check that the package appears in the "dependencies" dictionary and add it to the "testables" list:

```
{
    "dependencies": {
        ...
        "isaacasimov.foundation.my-random": "0.1.0",
        ...
    },
    "testables": ["isaacasimov.foundation.my-random"]
}
```

You can check the topic in Unity community: [upm test on test runner][unity-upm-test-runner]

## 8. Perform the test
Open the Test Runner and go to the Editor section. Here you can run the package test for "my-random" and get a successfull result.

## Conclusion
We imported into Unity a simple random utility package and tested with Unity Test Runner. The package now works both locally and within Unity.

Back to [Documentation Hub](../index.md)


[github-token-permission]: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/enabling-features-for-your-repository/
[unity-upm-local]: https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.3/Documentation/Manual/upm-ui-local.html "Unity Manual - Install UPM from local folder"
[unity-upm-git]: https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.3/Documentation/Manual/upm-ui-giturl.html "Unity Manual - Install UPM from git"
[unity-upm-git-revision]: https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.3/Documentation/Manual/upm-git.html#revision) "Unity Manual - Specify git revision"
[unity-upm-test-runner]: https://discussions.unity.com/t/test-runner-not-showing-any-of-my-tests/729955/10 "Unity Community - UPM test on Test Runner"
